- Hey YouTube, hey Charlie.
- Hey, thanks so much for having me on.
- Yeah, it's great.
Good to have you here.
Everyone out in the audience, please let me know
if you got questions, thoughts, comments.
And with that, let's go ahead and kick it off.
Charlie, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Thanks so much, it's my pleasure to be here.
- Yeah, it's a pleasure to have you.
We're gonna talk about making Python code fast.
Bit built some pretty interesting tools here with rough.
And we're gonna, we'll see about integrating rust
into rough and some of, you know, it's,
there's a lot of cool tools around this sort of
code quality side of things, right?
Like black took off in ways I think,
even though Lukas didn't maybe imagine it would take off.
and this is kind of in that same realm, and of course,
and integrates well,
it plays well with black along the way as well.
So we'll get to talk all about those things.
It's gonna be tons of fun to dig into them,
but before we get to it, let's start with your story.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
And Rust.
- Yeah, yeah.
So I got into programming,
I guess the summer before I went to college,
when I guess I was supposed to be like doing something fun,
I taught myself Java.
And it was the sort of thing that a lot of people
had told me I would like,
but I never really had a chance to dig into.
I ended up, I went to school, majored in computer science.
So, did a bunch of internships while I was in college.
And then when I, my sort of junior year internship
and my first year out of school,
I worked at a company called Khan Academy,
which is like an education technology company.
And at the time, this is less true now,
but at the time they were a really big Python job
and they had one of the biggest like App Engine deployments.
It was like Khan Academy and like Snapchat
and like a couple other.
- Wow, I had no idea.
- Someone.
- Yeah, obviously I'm familiar with Khan Academy,
K-H-A-N, I'm sure a lot of people are.
But I didn't realize that one,
they were such a GCP customer and that was Python.
Was that Flask or Django on GCP or what was it?
It was like Flask on App Engine.
We did not use Django.
But they actually, I mean, it's a whole nother story, but they did a big Go rewrite after
I left, which is also super interesting.
I mean, it's not Python, but it is still very interesting.
Just like migrating a system that big from any language to any other language is always
pretty interesting.
At Khan Academy, yeah, I did some Python.
I would say that I mostly did web,
and we can talk a little bit more about this
'cause really through my career,
I've kind of jumped between a lot of different ecosystems.
And so at Khan Academy, I did, I think, a year of Android,
and did a little bit of iOS, did a lot of web,
did a little bit of Python.
And then most recently,
I worked at a company called Spring Discovery,
which is like a computational biotech company.
And everything we were doing was based on computer vision.
So we'd like take really high resolution pictures of cells
and then try to model like the way that they change
when you add drugs.
- Wow, okay.
- Which is, yeah, it's pretty wild.
I mean, I came into that with no bio background.
I joined as like the second engineer
and build out a lot of our like data
and machine learning platform.
So that was kind of a crash course
and building a massive system in Python, right?
We were doing scientific computing,
so it made a lot of sense to use Python,
so we ended up using Python for almost everything.
- Python's a really good choice for the web,
but it's the de facto choice for data science, right?
- Yes, yeah, exactly.
- There's not a whole lot of other choices,
whereas on the web, there's five or six other platforms
and languages that are also contenders for that space.
- Right, right.
So we built out what I consider to be a fairly large Python code base.
It was a big monorepo.
And I spent, I can't remember, four or five years building that out and really writing
a lot of Python every day.
And that's where a lot of my Python experience comes from.
And that experience specifically also informed a lot of Ruff.
And I can talk more about how those experiences intertwined,
but that's kind of my Python background.
It must have been really fun to explore
some of this visualizing cells and interacting
with microscopes and--
That was amazing.
Yeah.
--all those kind of things.
The coolest part of the job was just
that if you bucket it really crudely, a third of our team
were software engineers or data scientists, machine learning
researchers.
And then a third were wet lab biologists, PhDs.
And so every day, I was working directly with scientists
and building software for scientists, which
was just a super cool thing to be able to do
as part of a small team.
But yeah, wrote a lot of Python.
That's awesome.
I worked at a place that was a bunch of PhD researchers doing
eye tracking, like not Apple, but your actual eyes,
like what are you looking at?
Wrote the software to actually control the device
and get all the information off of it
and then like analyze that and put,
you know, generate like reports for the scientists and stuff.
And it's, there's a special kind of cool for software
that touches like reality, right?
- Yes.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it adds a lot of complications.
- Of course it does.
- But it is very cool.
You don't get exact numbers, you want to test it,
like, you got to approximate all the things,
but still, yeah, that sounds like a super fun job.
How did it inform Ruff?
Like, what are some of the experiences that--
- Yeah, totally, so--
- Came over.
Hold on one second, before we,
just so people know, Ruff is like a super fast linter.
Just give us the quick elevator pitch
so they know what the heck Ruff is.
We'll dive more into it later.
- Sure.
Yeah, yeah, so Ruff is,
what I call an extremely fast Python linter.
So if you've used linters in Python in the past, you've probably used something like
Flake 8 or PyLint or maybe PyCode style.
Maybe use other tools to help manage your code style like Black or like AutoPep8, all
this stuff that deals with effectively code style.
So Ruff is a linter.
it looks at your source code and it tries to report back and flag and tell you about
issues with it. And those could be stylistic issues, like this variable name is not great,
or they could be logical issues, like you reference a variable here that isn't defined.
And I think there's a lot that distinguishes Ruff, but the thing that I think caught a
a lot of people's attention was just how fast it is.
So I sort of hate benchmarks, because no matter
how much time you put into a benchmark,
it's always wrong from a certain perspective,
and people always complain about them.
I think Rough is comfortably somewhere in 10 to 100 times
faster.
Some people even say 1,000 times faster on their setup.
So it can be really, really dramatically faster.
And it can also do a lot of auto fixing,
which is kind of a distinctive feature that I don't know
that many other tools.
There are certainly tools that do code transformation
in Python, but like Pylint and Flake 8 and such don't do this.
So for lots of the errors that Ruffle flag,
it can actually fix the code for you
and fix the issue for you, which is a big time saver.
I don't know if this is one of them,
but just to give people an idea.
one of the errors or warnings rather that it'll give you
is you have an F string,
but you're not leveraging its F string capabilities, right?
It'll just say F,
and then it has just static text, a literal string.
So it doesn't need the F.
All right, theoretically, you could say autofix
and it just, it drops the F for you.
It's like, yeah, you don't need that, right?
- Yeah, and we can also go the other direction.
So if you're doing a bunch of percent string formatting
or you're using the dot format style helpers,
we're actually-- we can fix at least one of those right now.
The swings are really complicated,
but we can actually rewrite, I think,
the dot format calls into strings, which is cool.
So another thing we can do is we can kind of keep
your code modern in a way.
We've taken a lot of inspiration from other tools.
like PyUpgrade2 has like so much cool stuff
and functionality in it if you haven't seen it.
And we've, we take some of the rules from PyUpgrade
and basically re-implement them in Rust
and package them into a single interface in a single tool.
So you just install one thing and you get, you know,
370 something rules.
- Yeah, that's, I can assert that it is indeed fast.
Well, I'll dive into a little bit later,
but I ran it on Talk Python Training,
the courses website that I have.
And I think that's got 20,000 lines of Python,
and it's instant.
It's like you press Enter, and then out,
you know, the stuff is just printing out.
These are the things it found, which is pretty awesome.
So back to your data science work.
How did what you're doing influence your creation of Ruff?
Like why not just use Flake 8 or something like that?
- Well, we did.
So like, or sorry, you know, in that role,
you know, like I said,
I'd like worked in a lot of other ecosystems
where with sort of like stricter languages, right?
Like Java and whatever else.
And it's not to say those ecosystems are better,
but I often come at this stuff from a perspective
of wanting a lot of like static analysis tooling.
So we had like a really heavily typed code base.
We used mypy, we used Black, we used Flake 8, we used Isort,
we used--
what else?
I don't know, like docformatter.
There's a lot of different stuff that we used.
And really, my job was I was the maintainer of this big system.
And a lot of people on the team were effectively
clients of that code base.
So they were kind of like using the stuff that I
and some others were building as like a library.
And so I had to maintain like this really big system
and like the more static tools you have,
in my opinion, it just like greatly increases the leverage
that you can have as a maintainer.
So we use a lot of tooling
and I think like a couple of things happened.
One, I was spending a lot of my time in Python
but I was also doing a lot of web.
And so, you know, like one week I'd be doing Python,
the next I'd be going and doing like React
and TypeScript and whatever else.
And so people complain a lot about web tooling
and like, you know, there are certainly lots
of valid complaints about it,
but there's been a lot of interesting innovation,
I think in that space.
And I was certainly influenced by some of it,
just seeing some of the tools that came out
and how fast they were.
And the fact that a lot of those tools
were not being written in JavaScript,
sort of intentionally to make them super performant
was pretty interesting to me.
So like, I don't know,
I don't wanna like name drop a bunch of tools,
but in the web ecosystem,
more tooling is being written in like Go, Rust,
and even some other sort of more out there languages
like Zig.
And to me, that was kind of an interesting thing.
It was like, well,
does the Python tooling have to be written in Python?
Like what does, like, why does that have to be the case?
And like, what does it buy you and what do you lose?
So that was one thing.
The other was we actually started to do
a lot of Rust Python hybrid stuff in our own code base.
So, our code base was fully Python
and over time we took some of the like
really performance critical pieces
and started to rewrite them in Rust
and expose them to the Python side
using some of these like really great
Rust Python hybrid tools
that maybe we'll get into later.
So one example is we were dealing with image data.
So a common thing we had to do is just
download a lot of image files really, really fast.
And so we wrote that in Python.
We wrote a bunch of versions that
use all sorts of multiprocessing, threading,
and we tried everything.
And then eventually, we rewrote it in Rust.
And so we had a really simple Rust module
that would just download files really fast.
And we expose that as a Python API.
So from the Python code, it just looked like Python.
But the actual code that was running
and the way it was built and executed all went through Rust.
Right.
So you have these big data, let's say big computation
problems, where you're like, this could be better.
At the same time, you're looking at this happening on the web
side, webpack or whatever it is.
And it's like, this is way better.
We can do this in Python, but we aren't.
So let's start, right?
Probably you got a little experience there,
and you're like, you know what?
What else can I build with Rust now that I know how?
- Yeah, yeah.
I mean, I think like, yeah, I was seeing the way
that this innovation was happening in the web.
I was seeing specifically the Rust Python opportunity
from what we were doing.
And then I was, frankly, feeling a fair amount
of frustration just with the performance
of a lot of the existing tools.
I don't know.
I'm always really careful with how I talk about this stuff
because I'm really not a hater.
And I've actually gotten so much value out
of all of those tools.
But I was being like, hmm, well, should it really
take one to two minutes to lint my code?
Couldn't it be much faster?
It's like a big code base.
And as you add more plugins and everything else,
it really changes how you feel about the tool.
It's no longer like something I just run and get feedback.
It's like, oh, I have to run the linter now.
Oh, I have to run the vlog.
And I was sort of craving that.
- Yeah, and if you're doing it on a team,
my experience at least has been
some people in the team continue to run it
because they find more value than stress.
And others are like, eh, I'm not running that stupid thing.
But then their problems get pushed
onto the people who still care.
And so then it creates this kind of like a tension,
and like, you know, Joe's code is always kind of crappy
'cause he won't lint it, but then like,
when I check out his code, my stuff starts reporting.
You know, like, those are the weird dynamics
that happen from tools that are like super slow unit tests
or super slow linting or those types of things
where certain people stop working with them
and others don't, and then you get these weird tensions.
So having it fast, there's like real value to that.
Yeah, I mean, and I think for me,
I left Spring in mid to late August.
And I started working on Ruff along with a couple
other projects.
And I never built a linter before.
So I didn't really know what I was doing.
But it felt-- maybe this is a little bit of hubris or not,
I guess, because it seems to be working.
but I was kind of like, I'll start with a linter
'cause it feels like a tractable scope of problem.
I was like, type checker, I know that's hard
and I don't really know much about it.
A linter, I feel like I could learn some of the concepts.
I have a good understanding of how it might work.
- To me, when I look at it, I think linting people's code,
like abstract syntax trees and stuff,
I'm like, "Ah, that doesn't sound like a problem to me."
But it's good that you saw it that way.
'Cause you did get through it.
- I think you can do it.
- Yeah, yeah.
Well, the first version I released was like very limited.
It was sort of, I sort of needed to get it out
because I wasn't sure that people
would actually really care that much
about like what I was doing.
'Cause like I've described to you a lot of like pain points.
They're also sort of like opinions, right?
But like, you know, I wasn't like a faster linter,
like who cares was sort of, I wasn't sure.
So, you know, when I released it, I was like,
I want to prove it's possible.
I want to like have reasonable confidence
that the performance won't get worse
or much worse as I expand it.
But I only supported like, I don't know,
maybe like 20 rules, which was fine with me
'cause I was really trying to prove a point
more than, you know, get people to adopt it even.
- Well, and a lot of times, go into that experience,
even if very few people used it,
you learn fantastic things, right?
- Yeah, I learned so much and I read a ton of code.
I've read a lot of source code now.
So I've read all of like, you know, PyFlakes,
like PyDoc style, PyCode style,
like, you know, 'cause I've spent time
like trying to re-implement a lot of those rules
and like understand how they do things.
And you just learn a lot from reading and trying stuff.
Rust is sort of like a whole other thing
where I did some Rust at Spring.
But I would say that building Ruf was really
like my Rust learning experience.
I think I had to kind of try to build something from scratch
to really understand the language.
>> Sure.
>> Like everything--
>> You do all the tutorials.
- Yeah, and I was like--
- You can do all the tutorials you want,
but yeah, sorry, go ahead.
- No, no, I just like, you know,
I didn't do the initial Rust migration at Spring.
I worked with another like super talented engineer
who did that.
And so every time I went into to, you know,
and I made a bunch of changes to it,
but every time I was going in and out,
I was like, I just need to like ship this and like move on.
Like, I'm not gonna spend a bunch of time
like really understanding everything that's going on here.
I just want to get it to work.
And so I needed to sit down and really focus
and be presented with a blank slate, I think, to learn
and just fail a lot and build stuff that didn't compile
and figure out how to resolve those problems.
It's honestly, it's a tough, it is a tough learning curve.
- Yeah, I'm sure that it is.
I started out in C++,
and so I know there are harder languages
and there are easier languages.
So Eddie, I'm not-- - I've never even learned
C++.
You're not missing that much, I would say.
Eddie out there says, "Rough is so awesome.
"I actually changed all the switch statements
"in my Python 3.10 code back to if else blocks
"so I could switch to rough," which is pretty awesome.
- That's super nice and slightly embarrassing
'cause we don't support match statements.
- So we support the match, yeah.
- That's the one big language feature
that we don't support yet.
- You could just kind of comment it out.
We're gonna just ignore, whatever's in the switch,
it must be fine, onto the next part.
- Yeah, exactly, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, not for your code, but for linting.
And then maybe let's start our dive in
with this comment from Tyler who says,
"What are the differences between linters
"like rough and flake-8,
"those versus code stylers or formatters like black?"
And maybe rough lives in the middle of that spectrum,
I'm not sure.
- Yeah.
There's certainly, like you said, it's a spectrum.
So I guess there's a couple of different ways
to think about it.
And with those tools specifically,
some of the responsibilities have, in my mind at least,
shifted a bit over time.
So for example, Flake 8, it doesn't change your code at all.
And it'll just tell you about issues.
And those issues could be style issues.
like you have extra white space here, or I don't know.
>> Your lines are too long.
>> This line is too long, yeah.
>> Yeah.
>> But it could also be a logical issue, which is something
that Black wouldn't touch.
So it might be like this import is unused.
So on the one end, you have different collections of rules
and maybe not really changing the code,
just kind of telling you about it.
Black is different in that Black just reformats your code.
So it's not actually aware of the logic in the code.
It doesn't know that an import's unused.
It doesn't know that a function is never called.
It just takes that abstract--
well, not exactly the abstract syntax tree,
but it basically preserves your code as is
and just tries to restyle it.
And so it's interesting because if you use Black,
you probably don't need a lot of style linting.
Like if you're using black to format your code,
a lot of the rules in Flake 8 aren't that relevant anymore.
They'll say something like--
Not all of them.
Yeah.
They'll say something like, you should
have followed the rules of this, but black automatically
follows those rules for you, right?
So they're kind of--
you don't need to correct the line length,
because black will wrap it, because that's what black does.
- Yeah, or even like,
you know, if you have like X equals one
with like no spaces between the X and the equals
and the equals and the one,
like the linter will yell at you for that,
but black fixes that for you.
So a lot of people will turn off those rules.
You know, this is why I say the responsibilities
have shifted a bit over time.
I think you're right that rough,
like it kind of sits in the middle.
We do less stylistic linting for this exact reason.
I use black a lot.
Black is immensely popular.
So I actually heavily deprioritized
all of the stylistic rules that are made redundant by black.
But the difference is we do do a lot of that automatic fixing.
So we can remove unused imports for you.
We can even do a lot of more complicated rewrites.
Like if you're using a dictionary
constructor, like the actual D-I-C-T parentheses arguments,
we can actually rewrite that as a literal.
If you have the rules enabled and you want to do that,
there's a bunch of rules around comprehensions and literals,
and we can do those rewrites too.
So it can do style and reformatting.
but it's somewhere in the middle.
- Yeah.
Yeah, the fact that it makes some changes,
but it doesn't go completely all in like black
is kind of why I think it lives a little bit
in the middle there.
One of the things that I think might give people a lot of,
what's the right word?
A lot of faith or willingness to give it a try,
is there's a lot of projects out here
that are large projects that people would know
that have adopted, actively adopted and started using Ruff.
I saw a quote from Sebastian Ramirez from FastAPI.
Right now in the audience, we have Olfeg says,
"The next release of Hatch,
"which I hope to do this weekend,
"will have all the new projects generated with config
"for a Linting environment that uses Ruff,"
which I think is pretty excellent.
Can you speak to some of that, about these projects,
adopting it and how that's helped you?
- Yeah, yeah, totally.
I mean, yeah, I never expected this.
Maybe that goes without saying.
I think you'd have to be super arrogant
to release something and expect a bunch
of these people to use it.
It's, yeah, it's been kind of wild.
Initially, there were a couple big projects
that I would call like really early adopters.
And they helped shape the project a lot.
Like, Pydantic was a very early adopter.
Zulip was a very early adopter.
FastAPI was actually like a pretty early adopter too.
And then like Pandas and Airflow and stuff,
those kind of are more recent.
I think it's been very interesting to reflect
on how that's happened.
Because on the one hand, it's sort of ridiculous
that all these projects would migrate over.
Because I don't even really have a proper versioning system
right now.
I'm on v0.0.225 or something.
I basically release every day.
And I consider-- I don't really make--
We've made very few breaking changes,
but in theory, we could make breaking changes.
I don't want to, but at least if you have scribe December,
we could make changes like that.
There's not really docs.
The docs are just this huge readme.
So it's kind of wild.
We don't support all of the Python 3.10 features.
We don't support match statements.
So on the one hand, it's kind of wild
that all these projects would move over.
I think there are a couple of things that helped a lot.
So one is that the entire time, I've
been very, very focused on compatibility
with existing tools.
And that comes at a lot of cost.
If there are things that I don't agree with,
or whatever else, I sometimes still support them or implement
them.
But the upside is it's very easy for people to migrate.
- Right, it might change nothing, potentially, right?
It just goes faster.
- Yeah, hopefully.
And over time, we don't have a third-party plugin system.
We've just implemented everything in Rust as part of Ruf.
And I viewed that as, I'm just gonna look
at the most popular plugins and the most important roles,
And I'm just going to figure out what's a blocker for whom?
And what do I need to implement in order to unblock people
and make sure they can use it?
>> Is there a way for people to let you know which of those
are really important to them?
For example, if there's some big project out there,
it's like, we would love to move to Ruff,
but there's this one plugin we're waiting on.
>> Yeah, I mostly hear about it in issues.
And there are a couple issues where it's like--
it's kind of a big GitHub issue.
It'll be like, implement this plugin.
And a lot of people will come and give it
a thumbs up or whatever.
We have pretty good coverage now, actually.
I mean, there is a long tail.
There's a big ecosystem of Flake 8 plugins.
And sometimes someone will come along and ask for a plugin
that I haven't really seen before.
And then it's just a calculus of like,
what do I want to prioritize?
Or how much work is it?
All that kind of stuff. - Yeah, exactly.
Is this a super easy line thing to do?
Like, oh, the line is too long, that's easy.
Or is it, you know, rewrite this?
- Yeah.
- This generator in this other interesting way, yeah?
- Yeah, that happened with, well, a lot of people want,
like, I don't know how to pronounce this library,
but like Darglint, like D-Arglint, Darglint?
I don't know.
Anyway, it has a lot--
>>That's probably-- I would go with that as well.
Yeah.
Yeah, Darglin, let's go with that.
>>Yeah.
It's very popular, but I've looked at the source.
It's pretty complicated.
So I need to--
that's not something I can just turn around in a day.
But I hear what people want.
And I mean, some of those migrations, though,
I didn't even know about them until they'd happened.
>>Right.
>>Which is always cool.
>>Yeah, of course.
And then sometimes people come, they submit issues,
I look at their profiles, I see what they're working on,
I get a sense for what their projects are.
So sometimes I know, and then I'm
kind of fixing things knowing that hopefully it's
unblocking them in different ways.
But yeah, I mean, I think, like I said,
I think the compatibility piece is really huge.
And I actually think that Black and iSort
and the popularity of those things
made compatibility for me a little bit easier because I can just adhere to what they do.
Yeah, so many people have centralized. Yeah, they centralized around what,
black is the truth and then we'll debate beyond that. But we're just going to accept black because
it's no fun to go commas on the end of the line, no commas on the trailing thing in the list.
Those kind of debates just go on and on. I think black kind of solves that by just
making a decision for you.
And not everyone's totally happy with every choice,
but it stops the debate,
and that actually probably wins the day
for most of them.
One thing that's interesting here that I'm noticing
about these projects
in the large open-source projects
that have adopted Ruff,
not all of them,
surely, but many of them,
like Pydantic and Polars
and so on,
themselves are adopting Rust.
Rust. Do you see a synergy of those? Like, well, where are we writing Pynandic core in
Rust like Samuel Colvin is, or the folks behind Polar's art? Like that's the core of it is
about Rust and, you know, that's the RS on the end, I think. So there might be a little
extra draw there, right?
Yeah, I think there's, I think it's just more like, like spiritual alignment.
Yes, exactly. Because it doesn't matter.
It's not like, no, it doesn't.
(laughs)
- But seriously.
- But there's, yeah, and there's a little bit of a bug.
Sorry, bug in the sense of like,
like once people start writing some stuff in Rust
and improving their Python,
they're kind of like more open to like, you know,
trying out other things that are written in Rust and so on.
So it's, I mean, that community has like been very
interesting to sort of watch and be a part of
the Rust Python community, it still feels pretty nascent.
But the tooling is actually really great.
And we could talk about that more,
but there was definitely a bunch of initial setup
for actually distributing Ruf on IPI
and making it insoluble.
But now that that's over, it all just works.
And I mean, I wouldn't say it's like requires no effort,
but it's actually pretty amazing.
Like how, like the degree of integration
and how much you can do now with these tools
like Py03 and Matcher and some others.
- Yeah.
That was one of the things that was really nice surprise
for me as well, is how easy it is to install, right?
Like, unless you told me,
unless it wasn't part of, you know, the elevator pitch,
you know, the little one sentence subtitle on the project,
like you would know from a interacting perspective,
which is kind of exactly what you want.
Also think that it's really,
there's some value to having these popular projects adopt
Ruff because Martin and audience, for example,
says I found out about Ruff by looking to see
what FastAPI does because presumably
it's a ton of respect for FastAPI and Sebastian,
his choices.
So yeah, it's got to sort of create
the snowball effect as well.
- Yeah, I mean, I think like one thing
that's a little bit overlooked
about like why that adoption is useful
is that it actually like feeds back into the project
in like so many great ways.
So, you know, for example, like
Dagster adopted Ruff and like they have like a really big
like Python monorepo with like, I don't know,
50 or 100 separate Python modules or packages in there. And they filed a bunch of issues
around how can we make Ruff better for monorepos. And so now they can run Ruff once and it runs
over all their separate projects that can all have their own configuration. And that's
a really, really powerful thing and something that if I was just sort of sitting around
building Ruff, I don't know that I would have known to prioritize that or what it should
look like.
And so, actually, working with people who want to adopt ROUF
and figuring out what stops them from using it
provides a ton of value to the project and just prioritization.
A lot of the isort stuff, I pushed on it a lot
when I started because ROUF does import sorting.
So you can use it if you want in lieu of isort.
And we implement a lot of the same configuration options,
not all the same.
Isort just is really configurable.
So we implement-- we certainly implement them
as they get requested.
But anyway, I prioritize that stuff
because a lot of people wanted it.
And they were coming to the issues and being like, hey,
this would really help me adopt it, blah, blah, blah.
So just getting the feedback and hearing what's blocking people,
that itself is so valuable for the project.
>>Andy: Right.
And you have a lot of people involved in these larger
projects, and they have specific polished needs.
Like, there's a lot of people who work on Pandas or FastAPI,
and those are mature code bases.
It's not just a pet project, right?
>>Yeah.
Yeah, those are very mature.
Yeah.
>>Yeah, exactly.
That's good, but also it's a challenge.
One other thing I would like to point out,
you started off by introducing Ruff, saying,
maybe people will be interested.
I don't really know if they will.
Maybe they will.
That'd be cool.
6.5, 6.4 thousand stars, that's a non-trivial amount of interest. That's a lot of love.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. And like, I don't know, one thing that I guess I feel weird, like
highlighting all the big projects, because one thing that I really appreciate is just
like anyone who's willing to try a tool like this, like moving tools and trying new tools
is a big decision.
And I just really appreciate everyone
who says nice things about it or everyone
who's willing to give it a try, no matter what they're
working on.
It's nice to have a platform to say that out loud,
so hopefully people hear it.
Yeah, absolutely.
So the other thing I want to highlight about the repo here,
not just the stars, but when I look at a project
and I want to assess, I really want to adopt this thing,
Do I want to make this part of my dependencies or things
or layers that I got to live with here?
And if it goes sideways, I got to change something.
Is, you know, how old is the project?
How active is the project?
And so on.
So, you know, look, we started this podcast,
let's see, 40 minutes ago.
The last commit was 52 minutes ago.
Did a replay.
- Oh yeah, sorry.
- Yeah, it was kind of.
- That's awesome.
I mean, you're like,
what are you looking here and it's then it's yesterday,
it's last week there.
I wanna point out there's just a lot of activity,
78 contributors, there's, it's a very lively project
and not just something that's cool,
but there's a lot of interest and energy in it,
which I think is a very strong signal
that it's something people should be comfortable adopting.
- Yeah, thanks.
I appreciate you calling that out.
I think, I guess a couple of things.
One, that's actually something that when I talked before
about why would these big projects adopt this thing
that like seems really experimental,
that's actually something that comes up a lot is,
and I'm not in the conversation,
but obviously I'm sleuthing a little bit on the PRs, right?
They're saying, well, it doesn't support X,
but it's like really actively developed.
And I'm like very confident that they will support that,
you know, at some point.
And so just having something that is clearly very actively
worked on, I think, is quite appealing and comforting
to people.
And I actually do feel bad saying this,
but one of my favorite--
not favorite, but an interaction that happens on the repo
is someone will file an issue, and they'll
say, this is actually also a bug that exists in the--
let's call it the upstream implementation.
So the existing Python version of that tool also has that.
- Right, like PyLand or Flake 8 or something like that.
- Yeah.
- It does this, but we think it's wrong.
We disagree with it, right?
- Or there's an issue where, you know,
the maintainer is like, oh yeah, this is broken, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, okay.
- And it's really not, like,
the reason I feel that thing is like, you know,
like every project is different and like every maintainer,
like most, like everyone's doing this like for free, right?
I'm not here to call out other maintainers,
but I think it's a very satisfying interaction for people
when they link to an issue, it's been open for maybe
for like years, and then I can actually just fix it
in like pretty quickly and ship a release in the same day.
And like that, I think that's like a really powerful thing
that resonates with people a lot,
is just the feeling of like stuff getting shipped
and it was getting thick.
And yeah, I'm working on this full time,
so I'm fortunate to be able to do that.
And I totally get it that other projects just
are in different states and stuff.
But I get a lot of value out of that.
And people are always super appreciative.
And so it all just funnels into giving me energy.
Yeah.
Eddie has called you a commit machine.
Literally every time I update my project with Peninsulas,
guaranteed to see new stuff on Ruff.
- I appreciate that.
I do appreciate that.
Yeah, I do try to write a lot of code,
but it's obviously not just me.
And the contributors have been awesome.
And I think, I mean, one thing I'm particularly impressed by
is just the number of people who,
I don't even know if I always believe them
when they say this, but just the number of people
who are like, this is my first time writing Rust,
or I'm really not good at Rust, or blah, blah, blah.
- And here's something amazing.
- Yeah, and they just make great contributions.
And they're like, hey, I'm trying to learn Rust.
And I obviously love that stuff.
If people are interested in learning Rust,
I actually think Ruff is a great project
and a great place for that.
But yeah, I mean, there are people who are working on stuff
Especially the stuff that I just like,
it's like big things I can't like focus all my time on
and just like having great contributors
who are like really,
you know, like thoughtful and like prolific.
Like, you know, every project is lucky
to have people like that.
- How old is the project?
When did you start it?
- In August.
So it's like...
- Yeah, so not that old.
My time, my brain is like melting, but it's somewhere.
I think it's like somewhere between four and six months.
- Okay.
- Sorry.
- Did you say you're working on this full time?
Is that like your full time job?
- Yeah.
- Okay.
And so how's that work?
Is that GitHub sponsors or are you employed by someone
to completely work out?
What's the story?
That sounds awesome.
- Still figuring out, you know,
I'll probably share more on that soon.
- Okay.
- I don't have sponsors enabled right now.
Still figuring out exactly how I want that all to evolve.
But I am working on it full time.
I don't anticipate that changing in any way.
Like I'm really happy in getting so much out of this.
And I think there are lots of ways to make it work.
And if not rough, I want to be working on other Python
tooling.
So I think there's more stuff to come.
OK.
Well, it certainly is neat tooling.
Let's go through the GitHub page here a little bit.
So I think we've talked about speed a couple of times.
We've talked about ways in which that happens.
You know, rust is an important part,
but it sounds like it's not the only reason that it's fast.
You have a chart with the obvious little asterisk,
caveat, benchmarks.
- Yeah.
- Are tough to make.
- You can read it.
It's reproducible, you know, like all the stuff
you can read maybe.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
But you're like, that's fast in this situation,
but my situation is different,
in which case, you know, such and such, right?
But for some large code base,
we've got rough in 0.3 seconds,
autoflake at six, pylint at over 60 seconds, just barely.
This is on the CPython code base from scratch,
which is pretty ridiculous.
And I already told you the numbers.
I don't have a millisecond number,
but it appears to be instant on,
20,000 lines of Python code that I wrote.
And it found some issues,
which I thought would already be discovered.
So that's pretty excellent.
It's nearly Python 3.11, 100% compatible, right?
You said the one major language feature
is the match statement,
but other than that, it's compatible, right?
- Correct.
- Yeah, it supports some of the other language features
like that are maybe less high profile,
like the parenthesized with statements and stuff like that,
but it doesn't support
the structural pattern matching yet.
- Right, got it.
So it's got the auto fix support near parity
with the flaky rule set, which is cool.
You talked about the way that you keep the performance fast,
but still have parity with Flake 8
is you have native reimplementations of the Flake 8
plugins.
>>That's right.
Yeah, so we reimplement everything in Rust.
And a lot of the time, that's me or whoever's working on it,
looking actually at the plugin and the logic it uses
and trying to mimic that in a high-fidelity way.
And often, we'll try to use the same test suite
and really try to make sure that we're compatible,
except in cases where we think there's
an actual sort of factual error.
I think why Ruff is fast, the plugin stuff,
there's a lot of interesting stuff
to say about the plugins.
Because I think Rust is a big part of why Ruff is fast.
But there are a couple of other big pieces.
So one is that we take a lot of care in the code base
to only do necessary work, if that makes sense.
So we support 300-something rules.
But depending on which exact rules you have enabled,
we'll skip a lot of unnecessary work.
- Okay.
- And that can help a lot.
So, you know, it's basically tailored
to how much you're using it.
So like, if you're not using it as an import sorter,
you know, there's a bunch of stuff that we can skip.
It's how I would think about it.
But the other like really big one is,
because everything is sort of implemented
in like one system,
there's a lot of work that would normally be duplicated
between a lot of different tools
that can actually just be done once.
So the way to think of that is if you
look at Flake 8 with Flake 8 docstrings,
is maybe one example, which uses PyDocStyle.
Sorry, I know it's like a tree of tools.
But if you add that plug-in--
so PyFlakes is going to parse your source code
and turn that into an AST.
And then PyDocStyle actually has basically its own parser
that will go back over the source code
and look at all the tokens and extract the doc strings.
And if you have a bunch of different tools,
some of them will share that abstract syntax tree.
But a lot of them end up doing work
that other tools are also doing.
Right, because they can't count on necessarily
that being done, or the plug-in system doesn't provide work
that's already been done to them,
so they've got to start over anyway, right?
Yeah, or they might want to do things
in a slightly different-- maybe you
have three different plugins.
I guess one example is a lot of different--
a lot of plugins need some way to tell if a function is
public or private.
And it's not super complicated, but it's not totally trivial.
You need to account for functions
that are inside of classes.
Is it a public method or a private method?
You need to account for functions
that are inside of other functions.
So there's a lot of rules, actually,
for determining what's public and private.
And you might have one Lint rule that's
like all public methods need to have docstrings.
And then you might have another rule
that's like all public methods need to have type annotations.
And if you have two separate plugins that are doing that,
they both need a way to actually extract that information.
And it's not necessarily the case
that it'll be way faster to do it with one pass and one--
I think it will.
It may not be Or's magnitude.
But the other thing is you have a lot of consistency.
So it's defined in one way.
You're not going to be at the whims of small decisions
that the tools have to make.
For us, as maintainers and building rough,
There's a lot of stuff you don't have to implement multiple times. I can leverage that and go
and implement other Lint rules. I don't have to figure out from scratch how do I determine
what's public and private? How do I extract all the doc strings from a file? We already
have all that infrastructure. There's economies of scale, I guess, to implementing new stuff.
It sort of snowballs a little bit. The tool gets more powerful. It gets easier to do things.
things. I think you'd be surprised how much of building a tool -- I don't know about you
personally, but I was surprised by how much of building a tool like this is just -- there's
like settings and configuration and how do people express their settings? What does the
command line interface look like? How do you find all the Python files in a directory?
It sounds trivial, but do you also want to respect git ignores? Do you want users to
be able to ignore files? There's a lot of rules. And so, again, it's like if I look
at a new Python tool that wants to go off and implement something, they might have to
implement all that stuff themselves. But for us, it's like we have all that infrastructure
in place. And so, if we want to build a new piece of functionality, it's just sort of
defining the rule and we get all this other stuff for free.
- Yeah, you can definitely build on the layers
that are in place 'cause it's all together, it's cool.
All right, let's look through here a little bit.
Like I said, there's the testimonials
from the different projects like Brian from Bokeh
or Sebastian from FastAPI and whatnot there.
But let's start with installing it.
Like I said, you would know
that this wasn't just a Python tool you could use.
Pip install, rough, that's the way to go.
But when I installed it, I didn't pip install,
I pipx installed it.
Are you a fan of pipx?
- Yeah, I use pipx.
- Yeah. - Yeah, it's great.
- To me, yeah, to me it seems like rough
is something I wanna run on different projects
and I just kinda want rough in my tool set.
And so I pipx installed rough.
What do you think?
Good idea?
Is it better to put it, say,
like in a per version at per project?
So like everything, I think it probably depends.
But I definitely saw a lot of stuff with PIPX.
I think the one thing that I--
the one issue with rough, and I guess
I recognize why this can be annoying for some people,
for sure.
We release a lot.
And so if projects don't pin their dependencies,
then they can start to see new errors as we add new rules.
Yeah.
Which I guess in some sense is like a breaking change,
but I don't really consider it as such.
It's like they have the--
let's say they have a Simplify rule set enabled,
and we add a new rule, and that gets turned on for them.
So anyway, the point is, I guess I
recommend pinning rough if you're using it
for a project, which I mean, with PIPX,
you're just going to stay on one version.
- Right, so you run pipx upgrade-all or whatever,
or upgrade that thing in, exactly.
So in a sense, it's kind of a pin,
but it's pinned globally, and it gets upgraded globally
and not per project, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah.
- For me, that's kind of okay,
but if I was on a large team,
lots of people who were working on it,
you might wanna control that more, I can see that.
- Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, so we have a homebrew distribution
and a conda distribution on Conda Forge.
And then I did those.
And then everything else was done by other people.
So I'm like-- which is cool, but it also
means I'm less familiar with them.
Yeah, sure.
So I mean, I don't know.
Publishing on Homebrew and Conda Forge
was a pretty interesting experience for me, actually,
because I've never done that.
And I didn't actually really know that much
about how those worked.
So that was cool, hopefully it's useful for people.
There's definitely some complexity
with the packaging and release stuff, which I don't know
if you want to talk about that or not.
Because we're building Rust, there's
a couple of things that we need to do
that are a little different from a standard Python package.
Maybe just touch on it a bit, because what you deliver
is a wheel, right?
But it's got the compiled Rust bit for me
on my ARM64 macOS build, right?
Yeah, that's right.
So basically, it just means we have to--
the wheel is a sort of pre-compiled version
of the package, as opposed to just giving you
the source code.
Like, if I just gave you the source code and not the wheel,
you'd actually need to have Rust installed,
because you'd have to actually build the thing
and install it, which is, of course,
an extremely unreasonable expectation for the people who
are using this for the most part.
- Yeah, but before the wheels really became popular,
that was part of the stuff, right?
It would just build for you.
Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, so.
- Or it wouldn't build for you, which was frustrating,
but that was part of the stuff, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
So basically, yeah, we just build wheels
for all the platforms that I know of.
- Yeah, is it all CI/CD?
You just push it to some branch and magic happens
and then wheels start appearing in places.
- Yeah, that's right.
So whenever I cut a release on GitHub,
like I just use like GitHub releases basically,
or I just use GitHub releases.
It kicks off a release job
and then that's all through GitHub actions.
So it just has a big matrix, right,
of all the different operating systems.
We only have to build,
thankfully we only have to build one wheel
per operating system.
We don't have to build one wheel per Python version, which
is something that can happen sometimes.
And then you have a mass explosion of number of wheels.
But that's all facilitated with a tool called Naturan,
which I'm a big fan of, which is--
it's sort of like, I don't know, like setup tools
and a bunch of other stuff bundled together,
but specifically for shipping mixed Rust Python projects.
So I don't actually really have to do anything,
for the most part, to make that work.
My PyProject.toml has Matran at the top,
and I have a Rust project, and I call Matran build,
and it creates a wheel.
So it's all like--
I don't know.
I think it's super cool that works.
Yeah, that sounds super smooth and super neat.
And like I said, as a consumer of it, also very smooth.
I didn't have to wait on some build.
I didn't need build tools or config
that I don't care about or don't use.
I'm pretty sure I do have Rust,
the Rust C as a CLI option I can use here,
but you don't want to depend on that, right?
- No.
- So you run it on the command line,
you say rough and you point at either a file
or a directory or some pattern of files, right?
Some star type of thing,
which is cool and that gives you the output.
gives you the output.
You can also do it with a --watch
and just run it constantly, which is pretty cool, right?
It's fast enough that basically, as you save it,
if there's problems, that'll just appear in the terminal,
right?
Or wherever you run it.
That's kind of a funny example because I based--
it's a good example because I'm pretty sure I took that exactly
from probably from TSC, which is the TypeScript compiler.
They have a watch setting and I like how it works.
And so I wanted that for Ralph.
So it's just, that's a very literal example
of me looking at another tool from like another space
and being like, oh, that's really nice.
- I suspect it's not terribly difficult.
Yes, I suppose it's not terribly difficult to implement.
You take the pattern and you put a watch
in the OS watch implementation
and you say, call me back when something changes.
And because it's fast, it just reruns, right?
But it's still--
- Yeah, that's exactly right.
- It's very handy though that it's there.
The other thing that's interesting is
you can do it as a pre-commit hook, which is nice.
- Yep, yeah, that's...
Yeah, that works pretty well for people, I think.
A lot of people seem to use it, so I'm glad that it exists.
- Yeah.
It's a little bit of a weird setup
'cause maybe it's actually not that interesting
to talk about, but it's in like a separate repo
for sort of like complicated reasons
that I can't even really remember.
- Okay, I see.
Now, to configure it, it has a,
let's say, comprehensive CLI set of options.
Yeah, I can't remember, maybe 15 or so command line options
you can pass it, but you can also put it
into the pyproject.toml with things just like
and then you can put your various settings in there, right?
So it just sort of integrates along that,
or you can have a rough.toml and then put it in there.
- Yeah, so that's something that I took basically from Hatch.
So within Hatch, you can have a pyproject.toml
or a hatch.toml, and the hatch.toml
kind of like unnests the configuration.
Like if you use a rough.toml,
you don't need to have like tool.rough at the top
and stuff like that.
I think one thing that I'm quite happy that we have
is the configuration is very type safe.
So if you try to--
so that line, select equals EF, those
are error rule codes that are defined in Ruff.
And so if you replaced F with some string that
wasn't a real rule, you'll get an error saying your PyProject.toml was invalid.
And similarly, we also create what are called JSON schemas for the configuration. So if
you're in PyCharm and you open up a PyProject.toml and you type tool.rough, it'll show you all
the options, it'll actually surface the documentation we have for the options too.
Oh, nice.
Which is pretty cool. Yeah. So I'd like more tools to do that because I think it's super
useful. I think Poetry has it, but not too many others do. You can get it in VS Code
as well, but you need to install an extension. It's called Even Better Toml, I think.
Right, OK.
But I'm happy with those things.
I think it makes it like--
I think small things like that add up.
And I'm glad we're able to do them.
Yeah, when I looked at the configuration settings,
like the exclude directories and various other things,
that's kind of a lot to put on a command line.
It would be nice if you could just put it in, say,
rough.toml or pyproject.toml.
And then when you just type rough the thing,
it sees that, and it uses it, right?
Yeah, and yeah, I've kind of like intentionally like not put a lot of these arguments on the
command line, like for that reason, like you could imagine taking everything here and exposing
it on the command line. But the command line really just deals with like, how should the
thing execute and not like, I don't know, what should the max complexity be? Yeah,
the cave complexity, Jack and stuff.
I think that's fair. Like, put the common stuff on the command line and then say,
and if you need to go crazy, here's your --config.
Pass that in.
- Right. - Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah. - Sorry, one second.
There you go.
One thing that I did want to talk about,
and you kind of touched on, there's a bunch of the command line arguments.
One of the things I did want to talk about is the
the editor integration.
There's a huge bunch of rules here.
You got to scroll through on the homepage to get down to it.
- Yeah, sorry. - It's awesome.
No, no, it's good. I mean, these are like all the things that checks
that I don't have to think about anymore, which is great.
Eventually, though,
geez, I forgot it was this long.
Eventually, though, it has plugins,
or maybe that's not quite what I said.
It has an extension for VS Code,
and it has ways to basically add it
as a command to PyCharm, right?
Which is, those are both awesome editors
that are kind of very friendly
to thinking about code formatting,
and exposing the errors that this would as well.
So that's great.
You might wanna just talk about that just real quick.
- Yeah, totally.
So yeah, we have a VS Code extension.
So that was my first time writing a VS Code extension.
And actually these extensions use,
or they conform to something called
the language server protocol.
And effectively, that's sort of like a standard--
I believe-- I'll probably get a bunch of the history wrong,
but I believe it's Microsoft that publishes and maintains
that spec.
And the nice thing about that protocol
is you can actually use--
almost all of the code behind the VS Code extension
is actually published as a language server, rough LSP.
And what that means is you can actually get the exact same behaviors in all sorts of different
editors.
It's not confined to VS Code.
So if you use NeoVim or Sublime Text or whatever else, those all support this standard protocol.
And they all have ways to tap into that rough language server protocol.
So we have the standalone LSP, which
we have instructions for Sublime and other tools.
And then we have the actual extension,
which is published on the Marketplace.
And those are things I definitely
want to keep supporting.
And I view them as official arms of the project, which
I think is nice.
So people should know that those are official.
and like, I fix bugs in them and all that kind of stuff.
- Nice, and then for PyCharm,
you just add it as an external tool,
and then you have the rough command around,
or for both of these, if you prefer,
you just add it as a pre-commit hook.
- Yep. - That's also.
- Yeah, that's right.
- Yeah, that then like, as you interact with it,
it'll run the pre-commit hook as well
if you try to check things in.
All right, yeah, super, super cool here.
I think this is a neat project.
I ran it as my project and I thought,
everything is pretty much good to go.
Where, when I'm using PyCharm, for example,
it'll often tell me many of these things.
Like it'll say there's a local variable that's unused
or it'll automatically remove unused imports.
And yet I'm looking at 331 issues,
108 are potentially fixable with the --fix option.
So that sounds like there's a lot of value
to make that part of my tool chain.
- Yeah, I mean, feel free to have some of your own opinions
about which of those rules actually matter.
- Sure, I suspect you can disable them
in your config file, right?
You can say this rule I don't care about.
Okay.
- Yeah, and this is another sort of compatibility thing.
Like the API for actually turning rules on and off
is essentially identical to the Flake 8 API.
So that's also useful for people migrating over.
Yeah, I comment no QA is one option.
Yeah, we respect those two.
We also respect high sorts action comments.
So we do a lot of stuff to try and maintain compatibility.
Nice.
Maybe another interesting thing in that vein
is that we ship a tool called Flake 8 to Ruff, which
does sort of what it sounds like.
So you point it to a Flake 8 configuration file,
and it spits out a toml for Ruff that's compatible.
And it also tells you if there were things in the file
that we don't support, which is useful too.
Like, oh, hey, you're using these rules.
Those actually aren't implemented yet.
So that's also maintained as part of the project.
So I recommend checking it out.
- Excellent.
Well, Charlie, I think we're getting short on time,
but not short on topic.
There's a whole lot more to dive into.
I think it's a really cool project.
- Yeah, are we gonna do a big Wasm section?
(laughing)
No, I'm kidding, I'm kidding.
- Yeah, we could do a Wasm section.
We even have some great chat GCP questions in the audience.
I don't necessarily think that there's
time for those, unfortunately.
But there is one final question that I
want to ask that's inspired by the audience,
but I think it's good for everyone.
Jean-Gabriel asks, is there a roadmap or timeline
for rough development out there?
What's next, basically?
- Yeah, totally.
So there is no--
I guess the short answer to that is no.
There's not a published timeline, unfortunately.
Most of this stuff exists in my head and in issues.
Everything happens on issues.
We're just talking a lot on issues.
But I'll maybe talk a bit about the things
that I'm thinking about.
So one is fixing the structural pattern matching issue,
and so getting full Python compatibility, which
is sort of like one bug, but then unlocks
us doing what I hope will be a stable release,
even if that's not that much changes
and it's just kind of the marketing of it.
But hopefully, we'll fix that, and then
we can do a stable release.
There are two other big things on my mind.
So one is this is a really big project by--
not Ruff, the thing I'm about to talk about.
But I want to extend Ruff to do full code auto formatting
so that people could use it in lieu of Black if they wanted to.
I think it's a really natural fit for what Ruff is doing.
And a lot of people ask about it.
So the way that that will-- there's
an issue where we talk about this on the repo.
It's not some big secret reveal.
But the way that I think about that, like with all things,
is I want it to be sort of incrementally adoptable.
So right now, you can use rough with isort,
or you can use just rough, or you
can use rough to your input sorting, but not as a linter.
You can kind of pick and choose what you want to use.
And I view the autoformatter is the same way.
I fully expect that people will keep using rough and black.
But it's just the kind of functionality
that makes a lot of sense given what we're already doing
and the way that the project's evolving.
So I need to be careful because that's a lot of work.
And so I'm not saying exactly when that will be done.
But I do want to start working on it.
And then the other thing, which is maybe a little bit less
exciting to other people, is I think at some point,
I'd like Rough to get to a world where it stands alone
a little bit more and isn't viewed quite as much
as a compatibility--
as this compatibility layer.
Right now, all the rules map back
to Playgate or other tools.
And when you're using Rough, you're
kind of thinking in the mindset of those other tools,
like what are the rules and how do I configure them?
At some point in the future, I'd actually
like Rough to have its own API and own indexing of the rules
and to view that as a compatibility layer that
will not go away.
This won't put a burden on users.
But I'd like to get to a point where, conceptually, a lot
of this stuff is first class in Rough.
And it's not viewed as re-implementation
of other extensions, which I think
will enable us to do a lot of cool things.
But I'm hopeful that--
I plan on doing that in a way that
has no disruption to users.
So we should continue to support the existing API and such.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
Very exciting.
Well, congratulations on a project
that people seem to love.
It's got a lot of traction and definitely
doing some cool stuff.
So before we get out of here, though, final two questions.
If you're going to write some Python code,
what editor are you using these days?
I use PyCharm for everything.
And that includes Rust.
So I do all my Rust and my Python and PyCharm.
>>Nice.
Is there a cool plugin that basically adds Rust support to--
>>Yeah, there's an official IntelliJ Rust plugin.
>>Got it.
Nice.
>>Works really well.
>>Yeah, I haven't tried.
I've used IntelliJ for--
I like that platform for Dart and Flutter.
But I haven't tried to plug Rust into it.
But it does do a lot of things.
Cool.
And then notable PyPI package, something out there.
You've named a couple that do the Rust integration nicely,
but anything you wanna give a shout out to?
- Yeah, I really wanna give a shout out.
I've already mentioned it a few times,
but I think if you're interested in doing Rust Python stuff,
you should really look at Matrin.
- Matrin, all right. - M-A-T-U-R-I-N.
It just makes the publishing really easy,
and you still have to learn Rust, which is not easy,
but I do.
It's worthwhile, I think, but it's not easy.
But it makes the publishing of Rust code to PyPI--
or PyPI, sorry--
really easy.
Yeah.
Awesome.
Well, great recommendation.
Thanks for being here.
Final call to action.
People want to get started with Ruff.
What do you tell them?
Sorry.
Well, I think the main thing that I would like to say
is if you're interested in contributing,
even if you don't know that much Rust
and are interested in learning, I'd love to see you on the repo.
And I hope it's a place that people feel really welcome
to come and contribute, even if they aren't 100% certain
if their code is right or anything like that.
So definitely really excited to have more contributors
and have more people coming into the project.
And of course, you should also try using it yourself.
All right, excellent.
Well, thanks for being here.
It was a great, great conversation with you.
Yeah, thanks so much for having me. It was a really cool opportunity. Appreciate it.
Yeah, you bet. Bye.